---
title: Introduction
author: Mark Thurner and Juan Pimentel
layout: chapter
permalink: /introduction/
---
Unlike Neil MacGregor's bestselling *History of the World in 100
Objects*[^1], our small cabinet's curious objects cannot be found in a
single museum. The reasons for this are several. First, from the late
fifteenth century down to our own day, the New World and in particular
that part of it now called Latin America, has been plundered and
pilfered for its 'treasures' and 'wonders' not by one conqueror, empire,
explorer, collector, or museum, but by many. Consequently, many of its
natural and cultural productions are scattered around the world, and in
too many cases the provenance of the object has been lost. Second, the
global nature of knowledge production has, since the sixteenth century,
meant that everywhere objects have been removed not once but several
times to new sites of study, storage and display. As a result, many key
objects of modern wonder and knowledge have had several owners and
keepers, indeed several 'afterlives.' Their histories and identities
have often been lost, or remade, in the shuffle.

Our small cabinet of curiosities of New World objects of knowledge is
thus not a select inventory of any museum collection. It is instead the
collective product of the LAGLOBAL international research network. It
responds to the LAGLOBAL (acronym for 'Latin America and the Global
History of Knowledge') charge to make accessible to the non-specialist
reader knowledge otherwise difficult to access. With generous support
from the Leverhulme Trust and, at turns, the network's several
institutional partners (Institute of Latin American Studies, University
of London; Centre Amerindian, Latin American and Caribbean Studies,
Saint Andrews; Department of the History of Science, CSIC, Madrid;
Department of the History of Medicine and Science, FIOCRUZ, Rio de
Janeiro; Department of Anthropology, History and the Humanities,
FLACSO-Ecuador, Quito; Department of Historical Studies, El Colegio de
Mexico; Institute of Historical Studies, University of Texas at Austin;
the John Carter Brown Library, Brown University), our purpose at
LAGLOBAL is to advance and disseminate research on Latin America's
frequently neglected and often invisible contributions to the global
history of knowledge.

This portable cabinet squeezed between two covers is not an
encyclopedia. It consists of about forty, finely illustrated,
eye-opening entries of 1000-4000 words that, each in its own way,
attempts to capture the dynamic, often global itineraries of key New
World objects of knowledge. Our object-images range from Pre-Columbian
codices to colonial portrait paintings, and from enlightenment treatises
to medicine cabinets, volcanoes, and fossil bones. Any New World cabinet
could house hundreds of objects or images, but our aim here is not to be
comprehensive nor systematic. Like most historical cabinets, ours
reflects the interests and contingencies of its collectors and keepers.
In this sense, it is clearly the contingent product of the recent
itinerary of the LAGLOBAL project. That itinerary includes a series of
international workshops held in the museums, libraries and research
centres of London, Madrid, Seville, Cadiz, Rio de Janeiro, and Quito.

Our purpose here is not to prescribe how to read these objects but
instead to gently encourage historical curiosity in the reader with an
eye for images and objects. In this regard, our little cabinet is not so
unlike those early modern *Gabinete* (Spanish), *Studiolo* (Italian) or
*Wunderkammer* (German). Indeed, we have thus modestly opted to mimic
the traditional classificatory structure of early modern cabinets,
dividing our objects into the questionable but historically significant
categories of *Artificialia* and *Naturalia*. We do this with clear
recognition that the 'natural' things in our cabinet are 'artificial'
representations with specific histories.

Our further aim here is to incite critical curiosity about the New World
as a key protaganist in the history of modern knowledge. A prime example
of this curious but at the same time critical mix of the artificial and
the natural, condensed in an object of New World knowledge, is the
stunning *Quadro del Perú* (1799). This Hispano-Italo-Peruvian 'wall
museum' or 'painted museum' is a veritable cabinet in itself. Like a
museum, it embraces in a single work several genres or discourses of
representation and transmission, including scientific and historical
text, landscape, miniature portraiture, and cartography, all in a framed
exhibition that presents hundreds of niches or galleries of Peruvian
naturalia and artificialia. It will serve us well in this introduction
as a potent illustration of our purpose and method.

{% include figure.html src="/assets/img/figures/0-1-1.jpg" alt="" text="Figure 1. Quadro de Historia Natural,
Civil y Geográfica del Reyno del Perú, año de 1799. Courtesy of the
National Museum of Natural Sciences, Madrid. A high quality image of the
*Quadro* is available for viewing on the <a href'https://artsandculture.google.com/asset/quadro-de-historia-natural-civil-y-geogr%C3%A1fica-del-reyno-del-per%C3%BA-jos%C3%A9-ignacio-de-lequanda/igE86USP5Q1cYg?hl=es'>Google Arts and Culture platform</a>" %}

There have been and are many ways to interact with this object. It's
perhaps easy to imagine all the people and animals depicted in *El
Quadro del Perú* leaping out of their colourful frames and into our
post-Google world of virtual galleries and video messages, in a sort of
animated Trompe-l\'œil. But can we imagine the reverse? If, like Alice
in Wonderland, we could swallow a shrinking pill, step through the
looking-glass, and find ourselves in the underworld of *El Quadro*, what
might we see and learn?

Despite the lacunae of the historical record, scholars have pieced
together key elements and moments in the secret career of the *Quadro
del Perú*. From its intercultural gestation in late eighteenth-century
Peru to its purgatory in Madrid's colonial and museal offices and its
more recent mass exposure on the Google Arts & Culture web platform, the
Quadro has been a silent witness to a chiaroscuro history of
enlightenment and ignorance. On the one hand, the Quadro is a brilliant
tableau of the natural and cultural 'treasures' of Peru, a jewel in the
crown of the 'Spanish Enlightenment,' as its gilded frame unmistakably
announces. On the other hand, this enlightened tableau of Peruviana is a
spectre, a ghost, a haunting sign of loss and ignorance. First, properly
understood, it represents the knowledge production not of the 'Spanish
Enlightenment' as it is often read in Spain, but of the global and
colonial Peruvian Enlightenment. Second, for most of its history it has
gone largely unseen, in part due to bureaucratic contingencies, and in
part because the Quadro fits uneasily into dominant modes of aesthetic,
scientific, and museal classification. As an unseen, unsung and
uncomfortable artefact of colonial enlightenment, the Quadro is a potent
emblem for the LAGLOBAL project and an appropriate starting point for
this New World cabinet of curiosities. As it turns out, the LAGLOBAL
project and the Quadro share common goals. European ignorance of Peru
was one of the primary motives behind the production and framing of the
Quadro. Similarly, LAGLOBAL is devoted to recovering the lost knowledge
of the Iberian New World or 'Latin America' for the global history of
knowledge, where it is too often ignored.

The primary intellectual author of the Quadro perished in the port of
Cadiz in 1800 before he could disembark for his adopted home in Peru.
Most likely a victim of smallpox, he had only just completed and
delivered the Quadro to the Secretariat of the Indies in Madrid. Born in
Vizcaya, José Ignacio de Lecuanda (1748-1800) had spent most of his
productive life in Lima. There he played an important part in the
collective academic project of the *Sociedad Académica de Amantes de
Lima* (Academic Society of Patriots of Lima), whose most famous print
legacy was the brilliant scientific, historical and literary journal,
the *Mercurio Peruano* (1791-94). As historian Victor Peralta has
argued, the Quadro is an illustrated encapsulation of the spirit and
letter of the Lima Academic Society's learned project and journal. The
society included savants born not only in Peru but also in other parts
of the vast Hispanic realm, including Italy and the Iberian Peninsula.
From the very first issue, the *Mercurio Peruano* had explicitly sought
not only to enlighten Peruvian readers with scientific reports and
historical essays about 'the country.' It also sought to combat European
ignorance about Peru's place 'in the universe' of science and letters,
where it faired rather badly. Most European savants considered Peru to
be a 'semi-barbarous' land of downtrodden peoples ruled by ignorant
despots and inquisitors, and thus void of enlightenment.

The many illustrations that together compose the dazzling Quadro, drawn
by Louis Thiebaut in Madrid from an archive of drawings and prints,
paints Peru's place in the universe as one of unparalleled abundance,
and useful knowledge of that abundance. The Quadro drew upon Peruvian
concepts, sources and earlier illustrations, including the so-called
Trujillo Codex (1782-85) assembled by native and mestizo informants,
collectors and artists working under the direction of the Bishop of
Trujillo, Martínez Compañón, who in turn was responding to an official
call to assemble objects of knowledge about Peru and submit them to
Madrid and its Royal Natural History Cabinet, directed and founded by
the Peruvian Creole Pedro Franco Davila (see Creole Cabinet in this
volume). Other images found in the Quadro were derived from the
Malaspina Expedition, one among the many notable global scientific
projects associated with the Hispanic Enlightenment. In turn, that
expedition had derived many if not most of its findings from Peruvian
sources. In effect, the Quadro mixes its iconographic motifs from
several genres, including Casta painting (portraits of mixed-race
couples) and the *mapas orlados* or *cartes à figures*, those ornate
early modern maps in the Flemish tradition, in which representative
human figures of the territory populate the borders of the map.

What kind of artefact is the Quadro? The answer is not simple. Is it
art? Is it science? Is it a painting? A book? A map? A gallery? A
portable cabinet? A wall museum? Where does it belong? The Quadro is all
these things, but it does not quite fit fully or comfortably into any
one of them. The material of the Quadro is oil on canvas, which suggests
it is a painting. It is distinguished however by its dimensions (331 cm
x 118 cm) and composition: 195 scenes with 381 figures accompanied by an
extensive explanatory text interspersed in the scenes, maps and
landscapes. In addition, the framed canvas is crowned and gilded with
twin cornucopias graced by a sheaf of arrows, symbolizing the bounty of
the New World or America under Hispanic Monarchy. The two central
geographical images (an east-up map of Central Peru, below which is a
profile view of the rich new mines at Hualgayoc) form an axis that
represents the new economic fulcrum point of eighteenth-century Peru,
which had shifted from the southern mining region around Potosi to the
central region adjacent to Lima. Notably, the central region encompassed
coastal Lima and new highland mines as well as the relatively
undeveloped but highly promising Amazonian region to the east, thus
uniting three major ecological and productive zones within a relatively
short distance. In the Quadro, this vertical economic geography is
represented by the unfolding of a concentric sequence of cells and
niches populated by fishes and amphibians, small and large quadrupeds,
simians and humans, the latter divided in two classes, 'civilized' (or
coastal and highland) and 'savage' (or Amazonian), with each composed of
sixteen 'nations' or ethnic groups. Birds occupy the perimeter of the
Quadro, seemingly lifting the entire canvas on their wings. The four
corners are notably reserved for reptiles and insects, beings that, to
be sure, had always occupied disquieting positions in the Great Chain of
Being. Nevertheless, the Quadro is clearly not merely another iteration
of the *scala naturae*, a Neoplatonist scheme that in the eighteenth
century was twisted to serve racialist and supremacist thought in
Europe. That twisting scheme had been energetically rejected in Peru by
José Hipólito Unanue, an influential member of the Academic Society of
Patriots of Lima. In its stead, Unanue offered an alternative vision of
Peru as a land of unparalleled natural and cultural diversity that, in
most ways, was more universal than Europe (see 'Andes' entry in this
volume).

The Quadro is a mimetic device that reveals in synoptic visual fashion
what today would be called 'biodiversity' and 'cultural diversity' but
which in Peru at the time was simply called 'the idea of Peru.' This
'idea' was a well-developed notion evident in historiography, natural
science, and iconography. The idea was that Peru was culturally and
naturally sovereign. Favoured by providence, geography and history, Peru
lacked nothing. With its astounding vertical climatic diversity, Unanue
and other *Mercurio Peruano* authors argued that Peru was the teaming
home of more fauna and flora than anywhere else on the planet. This
diversity could be put to productive use, transforming Peru into a
prosperous cornucopia for the world. This desire to convey the exuberant
nature of Peru is expressed in the irrepressible dispersion of text
within the Quadro itself, which snakes through the Eden of Peruvian
biodiversity depicted in the painted frames. Lequando is the author of
this snaking encyclopedia, whose title is the name given to the Quadro
as a whole: *Quadro de Historia Natural, Civil y Geográfica del Reyno
del Perú, año de 1799*. His profuse text draws upon previous writings by
the author, including learned essays published in the *Mercurio Peruano*
and statistical reports on Peruvian political economy, prepared for
Peru's Viceroy and, later, submitted to the Secretariat of the Indies in
Madrid along with the Quadro itself.

The teaming, cornucopian Quadro was in fact an emphatic argument, a
polemical point of view, in ongoing debates about the 'genius' and
nature of the New World, and about the status of the Hispanic American
kingdoms 'in the universe.' At the time, many European savants held that
in the New World, and particularly in the American tropics, nature was
relatively young, humid, and weak; the effects of this nature on people
and civilization were enfeebling or degenerative. Such 'enlightened'
views had been preceded by the ancient Aristotelian and Ptolemaic
traditions, in which the 'Torrid Zone' was taken to be barren of life if
not uninhabitable. In addition, by the late eighteenth century many
European philosophes had argued that Peru was not a kingdom at all but a
mere 'colony,' unfit for self-rule, in part because, in their view, the
effects of Peru's enfeebling clime were augmented by the cruel
exploitation of ignorant and despotic Spain. The enlightened Peruvian
authors of the *Mercurio Peruano* energetically rejected such ignorant
views, arguing that Peru's history and natural resources demonstrated
that she was in fact a sovereign, self-sufficient 'country' that had
produced her own 'genius.' In this way, the Quadro was a powerful visual
argument against condescending, northern European views of the tropical
and subtropical New World. It directly countered European myths about
the supposed ignorance and backwardness both of Hispanic Empire and of
Peru.

At first glance, the Quadro appears to fall midway between an inventory
and a collection or gallery of images, that is, somewhere between an
Andean *quipu* (a mnemonic and narrative device of colour-coded, knotted
cords; see 'Quipu' in this volume) and *Instagram*. Like the former, it
serves as an instrument for registering events and data; like the
latter, it is a frame for displaying and sharing images. Lequanda was in
fact an enlightened accountant, not so unlike those Inca administrators,
called *quipucamayoc*, who recorded in systematic fashion and in
knotted, colourful strands the fruits and rents of Tawantinsuyu, the
Quechua name for the Inca Realm. The cadastral element of the Quadro
aligns it not only with the quipu but indeed with the rich semantic
field of the old Spanish noun that names it. According to the Real
Academia Española, 'cuadro,' which in the 18^th^ century was typically
written 'quadro,' carries more than a dozen accepted meanings. Among
these, the following six glosses are particularly relevant here:
'pictorial composition on canvas, wood, paper, etc., normally framed;
frame; in gardens, that part regularly cultivated in squares and adorned
with flowers and herbs; description, written or oral, of a spectacle or
event, so alive and animated that the reader or listener may represent
in his imagination the thing being described; set of names, statistics
or other data presented graphically, such that the relations among them
are made evident; spectacle of nature, or group of persons or things,
that offers itself to viewing and is capable of moving or terrifying the
subject.' Most of these senses of the word were anticipated in the
frugal 1737 edition of the Royal Academy's Dictionary, known as the
*Diccionario de Autoridades*, where 'Quadro' is given eight meanings.

In short, 'Quadro' is an ingenious, polysemic name that captures the
multidimensional nature of our artefact. Indeed, 'Quadro' would not be a
bad title for this book if it were not for the fact that the term has
fallen out of use. 'Quadro' thus comes close to, for English readers,
the better-known French notion of *tableau*. For Foucault, the *tableau*
is a device for ordering and classifying the world, a way of visualizing
it and making it apprehensible. We are reminded of the great works of
Turgot or Condorcet, where *tableau* alludes to compendium or synopsis;
of Alexander von Humboldt's *Tableau Physique* *des Andes et Pays
Voisins* or indeed of his famous vertical profile or *Naturgemaelde* of
Chimborazo (see 'Andes' in this volume) in the *Geographie des Plantes*.

Why was the Quadro presented in Madrid? And how did it end up hanging,
as it does today, on an office wall in Madrid's Natural Museum of
Natural Sciences, out of public view? In a sense, the Quadro was for
Lequanda personally and the Peruvian Enlightenment collectively
(although as we shall see this was problematic), a stunning calling
card, a treasure of art and nature presented to the *Secretaría de
Hacienda de Indias* in Madrid, as visual proof of Peru's natural
resources and political economy. Lequanda had left Lima for Madrid with
a purpose. That purpose was to gain official appointment as the
*Contador del Reino del Perú* (Accountant of the Kingdom of Peru), a
lucrative and prestigious position that he fully deserved but was denied
in Peru by the sitting Viceroy, who had favoured his rival. This effort
to gain appointment from the top required the deft use of connections
and knowledge. Lequanda thus participated in several notable publication
projects in Madrid that, in effect, disseminated or excerpted, often
without proper citation, the writings and insights of the Academic
Society of Patriots of Lima. The Quadro would be the more visible trace
of his efforts, though eventually it too would become nearly invisible.
For, like many well-guarded and/or misapprehended treasures, access to
the work has always been problematic. In its afterlife, the Quadro would
become --and indeed it remains so today\-- a haunting spectre of the
Hispanic American enlightenment. It is precisely for this reason that
the Quadro fits so well as the frontispiece and starting point of this
book or 'cabinet,' and as an emblem for the LAGLOBAL project as a whole.

We know that the Quadro was the property of the Secretaría de Hacienda
de Indias from 1799 to 1836, when the Secretariat was absorbed by the
*Ministerio de Hacienda* (Ministry of the Treasury). The Quadro did not
physically move premises until 1880, however, since the Ministry
occupied the same building as the old Secretariat. The Ministry was
located adjacent to the Goyeneche Palace on the Calle Alcala. That
palace housed, under one roof, the Royal Cabinet of Natural History and
the Fine Arts Academy of San Fernando. The Quadro was thus a silent
witness for eight decades of the affairs of imperial officialdom, but at
least it had admiring, if not jealous, neighbours. If the figures in the
Quadro could step out of their niches and speak to us today, we might
learn many state secrets otherwise lost to history. So many flies on the
wall.

In 1880 the naturalist and historian Jiménez de la Espada petitioned the
Ministry to transfer the Quadro to the Museum of Natural History,
successor to the Royal Cabinet of Natural History, located next door.
'Here,' the petition read wishfully, the Quadro 'may be displayed to the
public under favourable conditions, such that it may be utilized for the
benefit of science.' The Ministry acceded to the request and, without
crossing the street, the Quadro passed to the museum. But that was not
the end of it. The expansive Ministry had its eye on the museum's space,
and soon annexed it. It was now necessary to dislodge the Quadro once
again. This time, the Quadro's fate was worse. After 1895 it became,
together with much of the Natural History Museum's collection, a
homeless wanderer, making its way from the Calle Alcala to the
storehouses of what is today the National Library, while many of the
Quadro's ethnological companion specimens ended up in Doctor Velasco's
Museum (an Anatomy Theatre devoted to physical anthropology), later the
National Museum of Anthropology. In 1910 the Quadro found a new home at
the National Museum of Natural Sciences which took up quarters in the
Palace of Arts and Industries on the north side of Madrid, where both
reside today. The Quadro would, once again, remain for the most part
unseen by the public. But along the way it would garner the attention of
one or two notable scholars and naturalists, including Francisco de las
Barras de Aragón and Ignacio Bolívar. In the banner exhibition year of
1929 (the same year in which the Ibero-American Exposition opened in
Seville and Barcelona) the Quadro made its appearance in a retrospective
exhibit on natural history staged at the Royal Botanical Garden next to
the Prado Museum. In 2005, the Quadro was finally declared by the state
to be *Bien de Interés Cultural* (Object of Cultural Interest) which
permitted its restoration by the Spanish Institute of Cultural
Patrimony. Since then it has been the object of several notable research
projects led by the Spanish Scientific Research Council (CSIC).
Nevertheless, the Quadro is not normally on exhibit to the public
(although it has been shown at several temporary exhibits in Madrid),
according to the MNCN for preservation reasons. It hangs today on a
poorly lit office wall behind the desk of the museum director's
secretary. This is where the LAGLOBAL research team examined the Quadro
during a workshop held in the museum in April 2017 (Figure 2).

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="3.534607392825897in"}

Figure 2. LAGLOBAL research team examines *El Quadro del Perú* in the
offices of the National Museum of Natural Sciences, Madrid. Photograph
by Mark Thurner (April 2017).

Why is the magnificent Quadro still out of public view? The full answer
to our query goes beyond questions of bureaucratic rivalry, lack of
funding, or preservation concerns. As we have suggested, the Quadro is
true to its polysemic name; it is a mimetic and moving tableau of image,
text, and map that together invite the viewer to imagine and know, if
not take possession of, a world named Peru. It fits uneasily into the
categories of 'art' or 'science' as these concepts are understood today.
The Quadro has not made its way into the Prado Museum, where both
colonial American art and science have been effectively banned from the
canons of the nation and art history. Ironically, the Quadro would have
fit perfectly in the original Prado that never was. The Prado was never
intended to be an art museum. It was designed by Juan de Villanueva for
the enlightened monarch Charles III to house the Royal Cabinet of
Natural History and a Spanish Academy of Science, thus complementing the
Royal Botanical Garden next door. Today, the Quadro hangs uncomfortably
and out of view in the National Museum of Natural Sciences, not only for
preservation reasons but because it is not true 'science' by
contemporary Spanish standards. The Quadro's digital afterlife on Google
Arts & Culture is more heavenly than its extended museum purgatory.
Removed from its materiality, history and institutional frames, the
Quadro may now be examined and dissected piecemeal on any screen as
'art' and 'culture.' But the Quadro is also somewhat out-of-place here
as well since it is clearly not a 'masterpiece' by the standards of art
history.

As the frontispiece of this cabinet-book, the Quadro serves as a
telling, polysemic trace of the history of knowledge and aesthetics.
Each object or set of objects presented and discussed in this volume by
participating scholars of the LAGLOBAL project similarly serves as a
telling trace of a history of knowledge and ignorance vis-à-vis the
Iberian New World. It is by no means an exhaustive collection. All
cabinets are subjective and dynamic affairs that reflect moments in the
lives and interests not only of the collectors but of the wider networks
within which they operate. By the same token, we welcome all 'visitors'
to this cabinet to encounter these curious objects on their own terms.
Like Alice in Wonderland, we trust readers will exercise their own
experience and imagination in the face of what they find here.

[^1]: N. MacGregor, A History of the World in 100 Objects (New York: Penguin, 2012).

## Further Reading

https://artsandculture.google.com/asset/quadro-de-historia-natural-civil-y-geogr%C3%A1fica-del-reyno-del-per%C3%BA-jos%C3%A9-ignacio-de-lequanda/igE86USP5Q1cYg?hl=es

Barras de Aragón, Francisco, 'Una historia del Perú contenida en un
cuadro al óleo de 1799', *Boletín de la Real Sociedad Española de
Historia Natural* 11 (1912), 224-285.

Bleichmar, Daniela, 'Seeing Peruvian Nature, Up Close and From Afar',
*Res 59/69* (2011) 82-95.

Peralta, Victor, 'La exportación de la Ilustración Peruana. De Alejandro
Malaspina a José Ignacio de Lecanda, 1794-1799,' *Colonial Latin
American Review* 24:1 (2015), 36-59.

Pimentel, Juan, *Testigos del Mundo. Ciencia, literatura y viajes en la
Ilustración*, (Madrid: Marcial Pons, 2003).

Pino, Fermín del, ed., *El Quadro de historia del Perú (1799), un texto
ilustrado del Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales* (Lima: Universidad
Nacional Agraria La Molina, 2014).

Sánchez-Valero, Miguel Villena, et. al., *El gabinete perdido. Pedro
Franco Dávila y la historia natural del Siglo de las Luces*, (Madrid:
CSIC, 2009).

Thurner, Mark, *History's Peru: The Poetics of Colonial and Postcolonial
Historiography*, (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2011).

Thurner, Mark, 'Historia secreta de la ilustración. O morir en Cádiz,'
*Revista Hispano Americana* 8 (2018), 1-8.
